Do you want to be rich?
Most persons would immediately answer,
“Of course I do,”
because they think being rich
means that they will enjoy life
and have happiness and contentment.
But let’s ask a second question:
What are you willing
to do to become rich?
Now, that’s a lot harder
to answer, isn’t it?
As you think about the importance
of that question,
let’s read a very important warning
that the Bible gives us.
If you’d like to take your Bibles,
please, and we’ll turn together
to the first book of Timothy
—1 Timothy 6:9, 10.
And this is the warning:
“But those who are determined to be rich
“fall into temptation and a snare
“and many senseless
and harmful desires
“that plunge men
into destruction and ruin.
“For the love of money is the root
of all sorts of injurious things,
“and by reaching out for this love
some have been led astray from the faith
and have stabbed themselves
all over with many pains.”
Well, that certainly is
a very important warning, isn’t it?
When we look at it, we see
that although the Bible acknowledges
that money is useful,
it highlights here
“the love of money”
or, in other words,
“those who are determined to be rich.”
And notice at the end,
there at verse 10,
it says that this can lead to persons
being “stabbed . . . all over
with many pains.”
In other words, they have gain,
but they also have pain along with it.
But there’s something else
that can cause problems
for those who have a love for money.
They may sacrifice their health.
They may sacrifice their family life
and even their standards.
But the Bible highlights yet something else
that they need to be careful about.
And this time, if we turn our Bibles
to the book of Proverbs,
please turn with me to Proverbs 28:20.
That’s Proverbs 28:20:
“A faithful man will receive many blessings,
“but the one hastening to get rich
“[or, in other words, in a hurry
he quickly wants to get rich
—what does it say?—
well, that person] will not remain innocent.”
And isn’t that true—that many people
steal, lie, cheat?
They even prostitute themselves,
and others kill other persons
just to get rich.
So, truly,
these are important questions
for each one of us to think about.
But why does the Bible
highlight so strongly
this warning
about trying to get rich?
Well, one of the reasons
is that the Bible highlights
“the deceptive power of riches.”
Now, you might be wondering,
‘What does that mean
—“the deceptive power of riches”?’
Well, maybe we
could illustrate it this way:
Imagine you wake up
in the middle of a dark night.
The wind is blowing strongly.
The rain is falling heavily,
and you start to worry about flooding.
Then you see that there is no electricity.
So you start to grope around,
and you find a flashlight.
So all of a sudden,
you feel like you have some help
because you can see what’s happening.
But as you try to turn it on,
there’s no light.
So then you remember,
‘Ah, I just bought some batteries.’
And as you grope up around in the drawer,
you find, ‘Here, I’ve got a battery.’
So you put them in with the hope
that this will now give you light,
but the batteries are dead.
Perhaps there’s a problem with them.
That is “the deceptive power.”
You put your reliance on something,
and it doesn’t help you.
Well, in a similar way,
money can have that same type
of deceptive power.
We may look at it.
We may think, ‘Yes, this will help me.’
But what happens in times of trouble?
So the Bible helps us to see
that money doesn’t always give us
the help that we need
in times of problems.
Let’s just think
about three different areas of life.
First of all,
money doesn’t automatically mean
that we have genuine security.
I’m sure you’ll agree.
The more money we have,
perhaps the more security that we need
to have to protect it.
But if we think about this,
the Bible clearly highlights the problem.
And this time, if you’d like to turn
with me to the book of Proverbs,
we’re going to read
Proverbs chapter 18.
So please turn there
to Proverbs 18:11,
and notice this very interesting word picture
that the Bible uses here:
“The wealth of the rich
is his fortified city;
it is like a protective wall
in his imagination.”
Now, that is
very thought-provoking, isn’t it?
Perhaps we
could illustrate it this way:
A person might pay
a lot of money every month
for a security firm to care
for his home and his family.
And each night
he may sleep very soundly.
But what if he found out later
that this was a fake company?
There were no security guards.
He was just paying money for nothing.
That security would be only security
“in his imagination,” wouldn’t it?
The Bible also highlights
another aspect of this,
and I’m sure you’ll agree
with these comments.
In chapter 23 of the same book
(the book of Proverbs),
Proverbs 23:4, 5
starts with this very good warning:
“Do not wear yourself out to gain wealth.
“Stop and show understanding.
“[Now notice the word picture.]
“When you cast your eyes on it
[that is, on wealth or money],
“it is not there,
for it will surely sprout wings
like an eagle
and fly off into the sky.”
Now, I’m sure you’ve experienced that,
haven’t you?
Your paycheck comes.
You think, ‘Yes, I’ve got some money.’
You turn your back,
and all of a sudden, it’s gone.
There’s not enough money.
And in a bigger sense,
in recent times, we’ve seen how money
can be devalued
and how even precious commodities,
such as oil and gold,
can lose their value.
It reminds me: A number of years ago,
someone gave me this banknote.
And looking at it and reading it, it says:
“I promise to pay the bearer on demand
20 billion dollars.”
Wow!
On outward appearances,
it looks like I’m quite wealthy.
But you’ve probably guessed
that if I were to present this
and demand payment,
I really wouldn’t get much from it
because this money
has been devalued.
So in a similar way,
just like the batteries that don’t work,
money at times
does not give us the security that we want.
Now, a second area
in which money can’t automatically give
us what we want
is with regard
to happiness and contentment.
Yes, money doesn’t automatically bring
happiness and contentment.
You’ve probably seen accounts of persons
who appear to be very successful.
They’re famous.
They have money.
And yet when they’re interviewed,
they talk about how lonely they feel
and how meaningless
their lives are.
And that’s exactly what
the Bible tells us.
It mentions that someone
who accumulates a lot of money
is never really satisfied
with what they’ve already got.
They want more.
Isn’t that true?
We’ve heard accounts of persons,
one way or another,
who have accumulated billions of dollars,
but they just keep on accumulating money,
even though they couldn’t use all that money
in 10 or 20 lifetimes.
The Bible also tells us
that oftentimes a rich person
stays awake at night
worrying about his money.
But, you know, there’s another area
that is even more important
than those first two areas of life.
And that is that money
cannot automatically bring God’s blessings.
Now, that’s an interesting thought.
Why can we say that?
Well, let’s look to the words
of our Lord Jesus Christ.
These are recorded for us
in the book of Matthew.
So please turn with me
to Matthew chapter 6,
and we’re going to read verse 24.
These words of Jesus
were part of the Sermon on the Mount.
Notice what Jesus says,
Matthew 6:24:
“No one can slave for two masters;
“for either he will hate the one
“and love the other,
“or he will stick to the one
and despise the other.
You cannot slave
for God and for Riches.”
Well, that says it very clearly,
doesn’t it?
You see,
we have to make a choice.
We can’t serve God
and Riches at the same time.
So this would affect our service
and our love of God.
So looking at those
three areas of life,
we see that money
can be like that dead battery.
It doesn’t necessarily give
us genuine security,
it doesn’t necessarily give us
happiness and contentment,
and it can interfere
with our relationship with God.
Now let’s look at a video,
and we’re going to see in this video
how two individuals are affected
by this love
for material things or for money.
I thought happiness was all about money
and getting to buy whatever I wanted.
I was really into fashion.
I was always thinking
about what I was going to get next,
and I didn’t mind
putting in extra overtime to get it.
My day ended with me
taking the last train home, eating,
and then going to bed
at one or two o’clock in the morning.
But this affected me
mentally and physically.
I’d wake up in the middle
of the night with panic attacks.
I felt so lost and confused.
Everything I’d worked for
was for nothing.
My motto for shopping was,
“When in doubt, buy!”
I bought a lot of things:
powerful motorcycles, a house, cars.
I was totally absorbed in work
and sometimes worked all night.
I somehow made it to meetings,
but after they ended,
I’d leave right away.
I didn’t show interest in anyone,
not even my wife.
All I ever talked about was work,
and I showed a real lack
of consideration for my wife.
I was really blunt with her,
and there was a constant
back and forth between us.
And we had a strained relationship.
We weren’t happy.
We just felt stress,
stress, and more stress.
Everything seemed pointless.
What did we see in that video?
You’ll notice that both those individuals
really enjoyed going after money.
They wanted to be rich.
But did they receive
happiness and contentment?
No.
There were problems
that came along with it.
They gained some things
but with pain.
So considering all these factors
we’ve just discussed,
does it mean that it’s wrong
for us to want to be rich?
Not at all.
Now, that may sound like a contradiction,
but let’s have a look at another scripture
in the book of Proverbs.
And this time we’ll turn
to Proverbs chapter 10.
In chapter 10 verse 22,
notice it talks about
a different sort of riches.
What is it?
Well, let’s read it in Proverbs 10:22:
“It is the blessing of Jehovah
that makes one rich,
and He adds no pain with it.”
Did you notice what is it
that really brings us true riches?
It’s “the blessing of Jehovah.”
Yes, the blessings
that we gain from God
are true riches because (notice what it says
at the end of that verse)
“he adds no pain with it.”
So it’s gain without pain.
But when we think about this,
we might ask,
How could we ever accumulate
these types of riches?
Well, our Lord Jesus Christ
answered this in the Sermon on the Mount.
And if you turn back with me
to the chapter that we already referred to,
Matthew chapter 6, you’ll notice here
that Jesus describes to us
how we can obtain
these genuine riches
—Matthew 6:19-21:
“Stop storing up for yourselves
treasures on the earth,
“where moth and rust consume
and where thieves break in and steal.
“Rather, store up for yourselves
treasures in heaven,
“where neither moth
nor rust consumes,
“and where thieves
do not break in and steal.
For where your treasure is,
there your heart will be also.”
Do we see what Jesus
is telling us here?
Not just to strive after getting
material riches here on the earth,
but notice that he says that we
should “store up . . . treasures in heaven.”
Now, this is not talking
about an offshore bank account.
Rather, it’s talking in a symbolic way
about how we can build up, as it were,
a good relationship with God
by means of the things that we do.
Yes, these are true treasures.
But, now, when we think
about the life of Jesus Christ,
he lived by these things
that he preached.
He didn’t try to accumulate
all these material things in his life.
No, he focused on serving
his heavenly Father, Jehovah.
He wasn’t distracted by greed
or by some desire
for personal fame and glory.
No, he focused on building up
these “treasures in heaven.”
You might remember
that even at one time in His life,
Satan the Devil tried to tempt Him.
Do you remember that one
of those temptations involved this very fact
—that Jesus resisted the desire
to accumulate material things?
Let’s turn our Bibles this time
to the book of Matthew,
and we’ll look at one of the temptations,
as recorded here by Matthew.
It’s Matthew 4:8-10,
and here we’re told:
“Again the Devil took him along
to an unusually high mountain
“and showed him all the kingdoms
of the world and their glory.
“And he said to him:
‘All these things I will give you
“if you fall down
and do an act of worship to me.’
“Then Jesus said to him:
‘Go away, Satan!
“‘For it is written:
“It is Jehovah your God you must worship,
and it is to him alone
you must render sacred service.”’”
So Jesus clearly rejected this temptation
to accept from Satan
all these riches and glories of the world.
His focus was on serving Jehovah.
And that was the wise thing to do.
If you stop and think about it,
you see, if riches
and the glory of the world
are the very things
that make us happy,
then why was Satan
willing to give all that away?
Obviously, it hadn’t given him happiness.
He wanted something else, didn’t he?
Jesus selected the right thing
—to build up “treasures in heaven.”
So if we worship Jehovah and obey him,
we can expect to get our lives enriched
by these wonderful things
that Jehovah gives us.
What are some of the symbolic riches,
we could say,
that we can gain even now?
Well, let’s think
about five different things.
The first one is in a well-known scripture
in the book of Psalms.
So please turn with me to Psalm 83,
Psalm 83.
And we’re going to read verse 18:
“May people know that you,
“whose name is Jehovah, you alone
are the Most High over all the earth.”
So, what’s the first
of these things that can enrich our lives?
It’s knowing God.
You see, many people
like to know the rich and famous,
but just think of it, we have
the privilege of coming to know
the Sovereign of the universe.
Yes, by learning about him
and getting to know him,
our lives truly become rich.
Now, in addition to that,
we become worshippers of Jehovah.
And that includes us
in a worldwide brotherhood
—a brotherhood that comes
from all sorts of nations
and racial backgrounds and languages.
And yet, this global brotherhood
is united in love
—the love of serving Jehovah God.
So that’s something
that enriches our lives as well.
A third point is that even though
we’re living in difficult times,
when we follow the advice
and direction given to us by Jehovah
through his Word, the Bible, then we
can attain a measure of happiness right now.
For example, the Bible
gives us advice
on how to be good fathers
and mothers and children.
And that can add to happiness,
love, and unity in the family.
But something else that’s important
that enriches our lives:
We have hope.
Yes, hope for the future.
Even though we’re living in a world
that’s dominated by wicked people,
the Bible tells us about what’s going
to happen in the future.
Please turn with me
back to the book of Psalms.
This time we’re going to read
Psalm 37:22.
Notice the promise that’s given here:
“Those blessed by Him
[that is Jehovah]
“will possess the earth,
but those cursed by Him
will be done away with.”
So the Bible promises us that in the future
there’ll be a big change here on earth.
And only those who love God
“will possess the earth.”
What a beautiful hope!
Now, the fifth point
is the wonderful promise
that the Bible gives us that those
whom we love who have already died
will have the opportunity
of being resurrected
or, in other words,
being brought back to life.
Notice the promise of Jesus.
It’s recorded in John chapter 5.
So please turn with me
to John 5:28, 29.
This is Jesus’ promise:
“Do not be amazed at this,
“for the hour is coming in which
all those in the memorial tombs
“will hear his voice and come out,
those who did good things
“to a resurrection of life,
and those who practice vile things
to a resurrection of judgment.”
What beautiful hopes these are
—a hope for a change in the world
and a hope for those who have died
to come back
and live again in a paradise!
Those are the things
that can enrich our lives right now.
So let’s think back
to those two individuals in the video.
How could they change their lives
so that instead of trying to pursue
after material riches,
they could achieve these true riches?
Let’s watch and see.
I realized that I hadn’t been caring
for myself on the inside,
so I decided
to read the Bible all over again.
I was especially moved
by how Jehovah repeatedly tried
to help the Israelites
despite all their failures.
This reminded me
that Jehovah had been expressing
his love for me all along.
I couldn’t hold back my tears.
I decided that I’d live
the rest of my life for him.
I adjusted my work and made
the ministry the focal point in my life.
When I get to share a Bible scripture
with someone and see it
make an impact on them,
I feel truly happy.
I saw some brothers
from the congregation
playing soccer with a young boy
who had just lost his father.
They were trying to comfort him
by spending time with him.
When I saw them
showing personal interest in someone
and considering others’ feelings,
it really impressed me and I thought,
‘I want to use my time like that as well.’
A scripture in the Bible says:
“There is more happiness
in giving than there is in receiving.”
The more I practiced it,
the happier I became.
I became convinced
that this really is the truth.
Now when my wife and I
spend time together,
I’m better able to really understand her,
and I’ve come to realize
how much she means to me.
I am so thankful that Jehovah
has taught me the truth.
So how did these two individuals
gain true riches?
By focusing on serving Jehovah God,
by telling others the good news
about what’s in the Bible,
and by sharing
good things with others.
Yes, if we’ve started in a life course
that involves just looking
for material riches,
we too can change
and follow their example.
But what about the future?
What true riches
are ahead of us in the future
if we continue to have
a good relationship with Jehovah God?
I’d like to turn your attention
to a beautiful prophecy
in the book of Revelation.
Please take your Bibles,
and turn to this book, Revelation.
We’re going to look at chapter 21
and verses 3 through 5.
As we read these words,
imagine, if you would, please,
what a beautiful place
the world will be
when Jehovah God
makes it into a paradise!
That’s Revelation 21:3-5:
“With that I heard a loud voice
from the throne say: ‘Look!
“‘The tent of God is with mankind,
and he will reside with them,
“‘and they will be his people.
“‘And God himself will be with them.
“‘And he will wipe out
every tear from their eyes,
“‘and death will be no more,
neither will mourning nor outcry
“‘nor pain be anymore.
“The former things have passed away.’
“And the One seated
on the throne said: ‘Look!
“I’m making all things new.’
“Also he says: ‘Write,
for these words are faithful and true.’”
What a beautiful promise this is!
In other words, in the future
this earth will be turned into a paradise.
And notice it says ‘no more tears
and no more mourning or outcry.’
And also notice that it says
“no more . . . pain.”
These are the blessings
that come from Jehovah God.
But how will people feel
at that particular time?
Let’s turn our Bibles to our final scripture
in the book of Isaiah
—Isaiah chapter 65.
And we’re going to start reading at verse 17.
In the beginning of verse 17, it mentions
about the “new heavens” and “new earth”
that Jehovah is planning to bring about.
But notice the last part of verse 17:
“And the former things
will not be called to mind,
nor will they come up into the heart.”
What a wonderful blessing that is!
That’s something that money can’t buy.
In other words, no matter what
traumatic experiences we’ve had in this life
—no matter what pain
we’ve experienced—
those things will be healed,
no more pain at all.
What a beautiful promise
from our loving heavenly Father, Jehovah!
And notice, if we look down
to verses 21 through 23,
some of the activities
that people will be engaged in:
“They will build houses
and live in them,
“and they will plant vineyards
and eat their fruitage.
“They will not build
for someone else to inhabit,
“nor will they plant
for others to eat.
“For the days of my people
will be like the days of a tree,
“and the work of their hands
my chosen ones will enjoy to the full.
“They will not toil for nothing,
nor will they bear children for distress,
“because they are the offspring
made up of those blessed by Jehovah,
and their descendants with them.”
What a wonderful time that will be!
And that can be part
of the riches that you can attain.
Yes, what should be
the determination of each one of us?
We don’t want to strive
after fake riches
—riches that just give
us gain with pain.
Rather, let us strengthen our relationship
with our heavenly Father, Jehovah.
And in this way, we truly will
reach out for the real riches
—those that we gain without pain!